Docs: Add "Tuning max_shards" to Prometheus remote write doc (#1018)
grafana/alloy: docs/sources/reference/components/prometheus.remote_write.md

for sending a fraction of data to their respective endpoints. The number of
shards is automatically raised if samples are not being sent to the endpoint
quickly enough. The range of permitted shards can be configured with the

> `min_shards` and `max_shards` arguments. See "[Tuning `max_shards`](#tuning-max_shards)"
> for more information about how to configure `max_shards`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`min_shards` and `max_shards` arguments. Refer to  [Tuning `max_shards`](#tuning-max_shards)
for more information about how to configure `max_shards`.
```

last truncate interval, it is possible for the truncate loop to checkpoint data
before being pushed to the remote_write endpoint.

### Tuning `max_shards`

> The [`queue_config`](#queue_config-block) block allows to configure `max_shards`. The `max_shards` is the maximum

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`queue_config`](#queue_config-block) block allows you to configure `max_shards`. The `max_shards` is the maximum
```

number of concurrent shards sending samples to the Prometheus-compatible remote write endpoint.
For each shard, a single remote write request can send up to `max_samples_per_send` samples.

> The maximum throughput that Grafana Alloy can achieve when remote writing is a function of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The maximum throughput that {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} can achieve when remote writing is a function of
```

> The maximum throughput that Grafana Alloy can achieve when remote writing is a function of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The maximum throughput that Grafana Alloy can achieve when remote writing is equal to 
```

> `max_shards * max_samples_per_send * <write request latency>`. For example, running Alloy with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`max_shards * max_samples_per_send * <write request latency>`. For example, running {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} with the
```

> `max_shards * max_samples_per_send * <write request latency>`. For example, running Alloy with the
> default configuration of 50 `max_shards` and 2000 `max_samples_per_send`, and assuming the
> average latency of a remote write request is 500ms, the maximum throughput achievable is
> about `50 * 2000 * (1s / 500ms) = 200K samples / s`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`max_shards * max_samples_per_send * <1 / average write request latency>`. For example, running Alloy with the
default configuration of 50 `max_shards` and 2000 `max_samples_per_send`, and assuming the
average latency of a remote write request is 500ms, the maximum throughput achievable is
about `50 * 2000 * (1s / 500ms) = 200K samples / s`.
```

Reviewer 3: so the goal of this paragraph is to arrive at a reasonable max_shards number, right? Can we give a query which solves for max_shards - something like `max_shards = target_samples_per_sec * avg_latency_in_sec / max_samples_per_send`?

> The default `max_shards` configuration is good for most use cases. However, if you run Alloy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default `max_shards` configuration is good for most use cases. However, if you run {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}
```

> at a large scale and each Alloy instance scrapes more than 1 million series, we recommend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
at a large scale and each {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} instance scrapes more than 1 million series, we recommend
```

increasing `max_shards`.

> Assuming a steady number of series of time, without a high churning rate, a rule of

Reviewer 2: What happens if time series is not constant or you have a high churn rate? Its not clear what I would do in that case. Should we just scratch this entirely?

> Assuming a steady number of series of time, without a high churning rate, a rule of

Author: I've rephrase it to make it simple. I've changed the query to look up 7d, so that it takes in account recurrining churning too.

thumb to configure `max_shards` to a value 4 times higher than the actual shards utilization.

> You can run the following PromQL query to compute the suggested `max_shards` for each

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Run the following PromQL query to compute the suggested `max_shards` value for each
```

remote write endpoint `url`:

```
clamp_min(
    (

>         # Measure the actual number of shards used the 90th percentile of time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        # Calculate the 90th percentile in-use shards over the most recent 24 hour period
```

>         min by(cluster, agent_hostname, url) (ceil(quantile_over_time(0.9, prometheus_remote_storage_shards{url=~".*grafana.*"}[24h])))

Reviewer 3: why the `url` matcher?

Author: Oh it's a typo! It's how I tested it internally 🤦

Author: Removed in https://github.com/grafana/alloy/pull/1018/commits/5b8feb7d5de1391606d718295dd61c9c9d4bc16c

        # Add room for spikes.
        * 4
    ),

>     # Recommended to run at least 50 max_shards, as in the default configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # We recommend setting max_shards to a value of no less than 50, as in the default configuration.
```

last truncate interval, it is possible for the truncate loop to checkpoint data
before being pushed to the remote_write endpoint.

> ### Tuning `max_shards`

Reviewer 4: We may want to also link to official Prometheus tuning docs: https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/remote_write/ 

But I find your explanation a bit more practical.

Author: I read it, but I'm not sure it's worth linking it, at least with regards to `max_shards`. I don't think it's saying much about it.

Reviewer 4: Not feeling too strong about it, so let's not block the PR on this. 

In general this page could have some 'further reading' section though with links, perhaps people may find their answers in the upstream that may be more up-to-date in practice. @clayton-cornell do we have any thoughts about it?

Reviewer: If the external info doesn't really add a lot, then we don't really need to link to it. 

It's easy to add: `Refer to the Prometheus [remote write tuning](https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/remote_write/) documentation for more information.`  at the bottom of this section if it helps the users.

The [`queue_config`](#queue_config-block) block allows you to configure `max_shards`. The `max_shards` is the maximum
number of concurrent shards sending samples to the Prometheus-compatible remote write endpoint.
For each shard, a single remote write request can send up to `max_samples_per_send` samples.

The maximum throughput that {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} can achieve when remote writing is equal to

> `max_shards * max_samples_per_send * <1 / average write request latency>`. For example, running {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} with the

Reviewer 4: Nit: any reason why not just `(max_shards * max_samples_per_send) / <average write request latency>`?

Author: I think it depends how you read it. I don't have a big preference. I did initially as you suggested, then received [this comment](https://github.com/grafana/alloy/pull/1018#discussion_r1634987255) from Dimitar.

default configuration of 50 `max_shards` and 2000 `max_samples_per_send`, and assuming the
average latency of a remote write request is 500ms, the maximum throughput achievable is
about `50 * 2000 * (1s / 500ms) = 200K samples / s`.

The default `max_shards` configuration is good for most use cases, especially if each {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}
instance scrapes up to 1 million active series. However, if you run {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}
at a large scale and each instance scrapes more than 1 million series, we recommend

> increasing the value of `max_shards`.

Reviewer 4: Nit: it may be worth mentioning why we want to limit the max_shards in the first place.

Author: Good point. Done in https://github.com/grafana/alloy/pull/1018/commits/5d48e471226cc9db1729899043d881c5c0dc444a

{{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} exposes few metrics that you can use to monitor the remote write shards:

* `prometheus_remote_storage_shards` (gauge): The number of shards used for concurrent delivery of metrics to an endpoint.
* `prometheus_remote_storage_shards_min` (gauge): The minimum number of shards a queue is allowed to run.
* `prometheus_remote_storage_shards_max` (gauge): The maximum number of a shards a queue is allowed to run.
* `prometheus_remote_storage_shards_desired` (gauge): The number of shards a queue wants to run to be able to keep up with the amount of incoming metrics.

If you're already running {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}, a rule of thumb is to set `max_shards` to
4x shard utilization. Using the metrics explained above, you can run the following PromQL instant query
to compute the suggested `max_shards` value for each remote write endpoint `url`:

```
clamp_min(
    (
        # Calculate the 90th percentile desired shards over the last 7 days period.

>         # If you're running {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} since less than 7 days, then

Reviewer: Yes, it works when it's inside in code blocks (I did a make_docs build to check :-) ): 
![image](https://github.com/grafana/alloy/assets/131809008/8517ef15-670d-4ade-8100-e1cd863f3fd4)

last truncate interval, it is possible for the truncate loop to checkpoint data
before being pushed to the remote_write endpoint.

### Tuning `max_shards`

The [`queue_config`](#queue_config-block) block allows you to configure `max_shards`. The `max_shards` is the maximum
number of concurrent shards sending samples to the Prometheus-compatible remote write endpoint.
For each shard, a single remote write request can send up to `max_samples_per_send` samples.

> {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} will try to not use too many shards, but if the queue falls behind the remote write

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} will try not to use too many shards, but if the queue falls behind, the remote write
```

component will increase the number of shards up to `max_shards` to increase throughput. A high number of shards may

> potentially overwhelm the remote endpoint, or increase {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} memory utilization. For this reason,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
potentially overwhelm the remote endpoint or increase {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} memory utilization. For this reason,
```

> it's important to tune `max_shards` to a reasonable value which is good enough to keep up with the backlog of data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it's important to tune `max_shards` to a reasonable value that is good enough to keep up with the backlog of data
```

to send to the remote endpoint without overwhelming it.

The maximum throughput that {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} can achieve when remote writing is equal to
`max_shards * max_samples_per_send * <1 / average write request latency>`. For example, running {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} with the
default configuration of 50 `max_shards` and 2000 `max_samples_per_send`, and assuming the
average latency of a remote write request is 500ms, the maximum throughput achievable is
about `50 * 2000 * (1s / 500ms) = 200K samples / s`.

The default `max_shards` configuration is good for most use cases, especially if each {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}
instance scrapes up to 1 million active series. However, if you run {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}
at a large scale and each instance scrapes more than 1 million series, we recommend
increasing the value of `max_shards`.

> {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} exposes few metrics that you can use to monitor the remote write shards:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} exposes a few metrics that you can use to monitor the remote write shards:
```

> * `prometheus_remote_storage_shards` (gauge): The number of shards used for concurrent delivery of metrics to an endpoint.
> * `prometheus_remote_storage_shards_min` (gauge): The minimum number of shards a queue is allowed to run.
> * `prometheus_remote_storage_shards_max` (gauge): The maximum number of a shards a queue is allowed to run.
> * `prometheus_remote_storage_shards_desired` (gauge): The number of shards a queue wants to run to be able to keep up with the amount of incoming metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `prometheus_remote_storage_shards` (gauge): The number of shards used for concurrent delivery of metrics to an endpoint.
* `prometheus_remote_storage_shards_min` (gauge): The minimum number of shards a queue is allowed to run.
* `prometheus_remote_storage_shards_max` (gauge): The maximum number of shards a queue is allowed to run.
* `prometheus_remote_storage_shards_desired` (gauge): The number of shards a queue wants to run to keep up with the number of incoming metrics.
```

If you're already running {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}, a rule of thumb is to set `max_shards` to
4x shard utilization. Using the metrics explained above, you can run the following PromQL instant query
to compute the suggested `max_shards` value for each remote write endpoint `url`:

```
clamp_min(
    (

>         # Calculate the 90th percentile desired shards over the last 7 days period.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        # Calculate the 90th percentile desired shards over the last seven-day period.
```

>         # If you're running {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} since less than 7 days, then

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        # If you're running {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} for less than seven days, then
```

        # reduce the [7d] period to cover only the time range since when you deployed it.
        ceil(quantile_over_time(0.9, prometheus_remote_storage_shards_desired[7d]))

        # Add room for spikes.
        * 4
    ),
    # We recommend setting max_shards to a value of no less than 50, as in the default configuration.
    50
)
```

If you aren't running {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} yet, we recommend running it with the default `max_shards`

> and then use the PromQL instant query mentioned above to compute the recommended `max_shards`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and then using the PromQL instant query mentioned above to compute the recommended `max_shards`.
```
